---
layout: post
title: "7 tips for hiring a freelance writer"
date:   2014-06-17 11:00:00
author: "Ben Chadfield"
author_url: https://twitter.com/benchadfield
description: "7 great tips for outsourcing your blog writing to a freelancer or agency"
---

An undead blog looks alive from a distance, but because of circumstances
\'out of your control\', your blog is actually dead. Once upon a time
your blog was loved. You brought it into this world after all. Every now
and then you hear of its cries for attention and feed it fresh posts,
but you know, deep down, that\'s not enough.

For the undead metaphor to work you should think of a staggering monster
that either sucks your life force or consumes your brains. Teetering on
the edge of life and death, its need for sustenance is all consuming and
it will drag you down if you let it.

There are very [good reasons why you have a blog][1]. Maybe you\'ve
forgotten, so here\'s a couple of reminders:



* blogs give websites 434% more indexed pages and 97% more indexed links
* B2B companies that blog generate 67% more leads per month than those
  that don’t



It\'s possible that the introduction of this post gives the impression
that there\'s some secret way to bring a blog back from the undead
(I\'ll let you imagine your own intricate moonlight ceremony).

Really there\'s no secret and you know what you\'re supposed to do: [add new content more often][2].

Your blog needs new posts regularly, but you aren\'t going to write it
or you would be already. Here comes the point: you should get someone
else to blog for you.

So far this has been all about you and how you\'re neglecting your blog.
Really this is about us at CS Workflow. Our blog has been live for
nearly a year and this post will be our first non-product update since
the new year. There has been a lot going on, which is why I know how
easy it is let the blog slide and focus on my \'real job\'.

When I was a Marketing Director in a previous life, I was suddenly
without an in-house writer. I wanted to keep our content marketing going
by engaging an agency. This is when I found Kathryn Hawkins, a principal
of the content marketing agency [Eucalypt Media][3]. It seemed fitting
to get her input into this post.

Below Kathryn answers some of the questions I had back then about how to
hire a freelance writer. There are some topics raised that are posts of
their own, but this is a solid place to start.



####  What questions should buyers ask when first contacting a freelancer?

Ask to see writing samples, and testimonials from satisfied clients
(LinkedIn is often a good source of those). Also, make sure to find out
about the writer\'s overall process in terms of collaborating with you
and what\'s provided in terms of revisions. By making sure you\'re on
the same page, you can make sure the engagement runs smoothly from start
to finish.



####  What are the main things a buyer should look for in a freelancer?

Buyers of content marketing services should seek out writers or agencies
with experience writing about similar industries—they don\'t need to be
*exactly* the same (after all, most businesses want to believe their
solutions are unique!), but the writer\'s experience should demonstrate
that they can easily grasp new concepts and industry terminology. It\'s
also very helpful if your writer has a background in journalism rather
than pure corporate communications — it means s/he\'ll be able to find
the real story in what you\'re selling.



####  What are some red flags?

Rates far below the norm typically mean that the writer isn\'t
experienced, and, as a result, you\'re not likely to get a
professional-quality piece of content. It\'s also a worry if the writer
wants to bill hourly, but isn\'t willing to give you any sort of
estimate for how long the project might take—insist on a milestone-based
approach in that case, or you could end up with [sticker shock][4]{:
target="_blank"}.



####  What are the common fee structures for freelancers?

Fee structures can range depending on the project and how your writer or
agency prefers to work. For an article or blog post, a per-word fee or a
flat rate for a set word range (i.e. 400-500 words) is fairly common.
For a more research-based project like a content audit, an hourly rate
is generally preferable, though most content strategists will provide
you with a ballpark estimate of what the project will cost. Retainers
are also great for clients with regular, dependable needs — we recommend
retainer packages to many of our clients, as it helps them make sure
that we have the resources to prioritize their projects, and they can
keep their budgets predictable. You can find out more about content
marketing retainer packages [in this blog post.][5]



####  What is the range in common fee structures?

Fees vary wildly depending on the writer or agency, and the work
involved. You can find people to write articles for as little as $5 for
a few hundred words—but I would strongly recommend against it. To
spotlight your company in its best light, you need to find highly
qualified writers who can quickly gain a solid understanding of your
industry. Depending on the type of project involved, rates for
professional writers typically vary from $0.50 to $2 per word, or $75 to
$150 per hour.



####  Are there additional costs a buyer should be aware of?

In most cases, you should factor photography and/or graphic design into
your marketing budget—many agencies will handle this along with the
content, though if you\'re working with an individual writer, you may
need to contract with a designer. If you simply need an image to
accompany a blog post, licensing a stock photo is often an easy and
affordable choice; however, if you are developing a more comprehensive
piece, such as an ebook or white paper, it may be worth investing in
graphic design services for a professional feel.

Also, in some cases, the buyer might want to add new information or
dramatically change the outline—if you\'ve already agreed to a fee with
your writer, you will likely need to renegotiate at this stage. Most
writers or agencies commit to a rate based on a specific set of
deliverables, so if you change your mind once s/he\'s gotten started,
the fee will change as well.



####  If a business wants to blog weekly, what budget should they assign for a retainer?

At minimum, a business should budget $800 or so per month for weekly
posts, though more if the company wants the writer to help with
promotional efforts as well. A well-written and informative post each
week can help the business grow its traffic and readership, and can
serve as valuable content to use in social marketing and email marketing
pushes.

With an annual expense of around $10,000, this is much cheaper than
hiring a full-time employee (especially one with the level of experience
your writer will likely have), and can provide significant return on
investment through new leads generated from the content.

As an added bonus, it is generally easy to scale up or scale down such
an engagement, which is impossible for a full-time staff member.



[1]: http://blog.hubspot.com/insiders/inbound-marketing-stats
[2]: http://www.quicksprout.com/2012/10/22/why-content-marketing-is-the-new-seo/
[3]: http://eucalyptmedia.com/
[4]: http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/sticker+shock
[5]: http://eucalyptmedia.com/blog/entry/why-choose-a-content-marketing-retainer-package
